-- layout: default
-- title: Weekly development report 2023-07-22
-- summary: Weekly development report from Bartek Jasicki various Open Source projects
-- backlink: ../../../index.html

Welcome to the weekly development report or what was done in my Open Source
projects in the last week.

### [Steam Sky](https://www.laeran.pl/repositories/steamsky)

*Roguelike in a sky with steampunk theme (written in Ada)*

Another week passed, time for the second report from the "All Quiet on the
Western Front" series. The half of time to the next big release passed again on
testing the game, fixing bugs, and probably bringing new ones by updating the
game's code. :) With that amount of founded bugs, I wonder how much will be
left in the "stable" version.

* Fixed resetting the selected items' type on the trading screen after buying
  or selling something.
* The game stopped hanging during creating a new game when there are no big
  bases around.
* Fixed saving the player's career to the file.
* Also, some fixes for new bugs implemented in the previous week. ;)
* Again, some code was moved to Nim. Except for the new bugs, the effect is
  smaller size of the game. Not too much, but always.
* And of course, the fun with cleaning the old code continues.

### [Nimalyzer](https://www.laeran.pl/repositories/nimalyzer)

*The static code analyzer for Nim programming language*

The work on polishing the programs continues. This week spent mostly on
updating the code of the program's rules. But there are also some breaking
changes. :) Plus a new setting for the program.

* Added ability to set options for `ifStatements` rule. That's the breaking
  change mentioned above. Now the rule requires at least one option to be set,
  but it can check all or only the selected things in the `if` statements.
* Added pragmas to code generated by macros in the program's rules. Mostly for
  procedures `ruleFix` and `ruleCheck`.
* Of course it detected some uncaught exceptions in the code. Now all should be
  caught. At least I think so. :)
* Added some colors to the program's console's output. Yes, it is 2023 so, it
  is good to have some colors here. It added one new, small dependency to the
  project.
* Added ability to set the maximum amount of the program's reports. By the
  reports I mean, how many violations of `check` or `fix` types of rules the
  program found plus all results of `search` type of rules. It can help
  especially with large codebases where on first runs can be hundreds reports.
* Some changes to the project's documentation are made too. Mostly related to
  the changes mentioned above.

### [Wine cellar](https://www.laeran.pl/repositories/winecellar)

*A graphical user interface for managing Windows programs on FreeBSD*

The work on the installing a new Windows application is finished for now. At
least looks so. :) I started to converting the whole process to use threads, so
the GUI will not be blocked during background tasks, like download, installing
dependencies, etc. The hardest part was to find the proper way to implement it,
but I think I have something. :) Also, the installer creating now starting
script for the application and the configuration file for the program.
